[MUSIC PLAYING]
[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I'm
preaching to the choir
when I tell you that the web
can be a dangerous place,
but I had no idea how
dangerous until I watched a Ted
Talk by our guest today, Alan
Pearce, author of The Sherlock
Holmes Handbook for
the Digital Age.
I learned that for
roughly $400, someone
can be paid to ruin
your entire life.
I think we need to
pay attention here.
And Alan, thank you so
much for writing this book,
and I'm glad I stumbled across
this Ted Talk initially.
And I was actually
horrified by a lot
of what you were saying because
we're innocently using it.
And I think most people think,
oh, we're innocently using it.
None of this will
ever affect us.
However, that's not
necessarily true.
But before any of that, I'd
like to go into your background,
you're a hardcore journalist.
You've been in war zones.
I want you to tell
us what kind of life
you had as a journalist
in the field.
And I know you've been up
against some horrendous
situations yourself.
>>ALAN PEARCE: Yeah,
it's a funny business.
I don't like to say
war correspondent.
I like to say Foreign
Affairs specialist.
And I found myself
in Afghanistan.
I'd been covering wars for
years, mostly in Southeast Asia.
I'd covered the Khmer Rouge war
in Cambodia for a long time.
>>REGINA: Oh, you've been
doing this for a long time.
>>PEARCE: Oh, yeah,
for a long time.
>>REGINA: When did
you start your--
when did your career
start, as a young pup?
>>PEARCE: No, funnily enough,
probably in my very late 20s,
early 30s.
You just stumbled on it.
I don't think a lot of people
choose to go to war, per se.
It happens.
>>REGINA: No, how
did you end up--
OK, were you studying
Pol Pot at the time?
Or--
>>PEARCE: Well, I actually
found myself in Thailand
on a kind of free
vacation, and I
didn't want to go to the beach.
So I thought I'd go
to the refugee camps
on the Thai-Cambodian border.
>>REGINA: As one
does on vacation.
>>PEARCE: Of course.
And I found myself
getting hooked, as you do.
People's stories-- they
were just so fascinating.
So I spent some time trying
to get inside to Cambodia
with the different resistance
groups and managed to do that.
And then in time,
the Khmer Rouge
were kicked out
by the Vietnamese.
And the Vietnamese
were in control.
And when they left, I
was the first journalist
I'm aware of that
based themselves
in the capital, Phnom Penh,
which was like a ghost town.
It was beyond scary.
And so I did that for a long
time, that sort of thing.
And I covered the war, going
out with government forces,
and then when the United
Nations turned up,
going out with different
UN units and so on.
It becomes a way of life.
It just--
>>REGINA: Sure.
Well, you were born to do it.
>>PEARCE: Well,
here's the thing,
if you're doing that
in any given day,
you see the very
worst in humanity.
And you also see the very best
in humanity if you're lucky.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, you meet
the most wonderful people,
brave people.
I came out with post-traumatic
stress disorder,
so an awful lot do.
And what gets me is
kindness and bravery.
If I'm watching a movie, it's
got kindness and bravery--
>>REGINA: Oh, you're in tears.
>>PEARCE: --I'm in tears.
I have to hide my face.
And I know a lot of soldiers
find themselves doing this now.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: Kindness and
bravery gets me every time.
>>REGINA: Because you've
witnessed it firsthand
in extreme circumstances.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So you moved
out of Southeast Asia.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, I
just stopped doing it.
I didn't get injured or
anything at that time.
I go back to London.
I'm working on the desk at the
BBC, and I'm getting bored.
I'm getting bored.
>>REGINA: What did
they have working on?
>>PEARCE: Well, I
was just doing--
I was working on the
Southeast Asia desk,
and I'm just writing
news bulletins
and so on and so forth.
And it's OK.
I kind of like it,
but not as much.
>>REGINA: You're a field guy.
>>PEARCE: Yes, I shouldn't stop.
So the post of Afghanistan came
up, the Kabul correspondent,
which was supposed to be the
most dangerous place on Earth.
>>REGINA: Kabul, yes.
>>PEARCE: This is '96.
This is the first time
the Taliban took over.
So I arrived directly
into a siege.
I spent 10 months under Taliban
siege, being shelled every day.
And it was beyond grisly.
I mean, just beyond anything you
could ever imagine, the sadness.
Wherever you go,
something will happen.
A stick of rockets will
hit an apartment block,
and there'd be a whole
bunch of dead kids.
Or people are queuing
for water at a pump,
and mortars come
in and kill them.
And--
>>REGINA: Well, what
was your protection
as a foreign journalist?
>>PEARCE: Oh, there's
no protection.
>>REGINA: So you just
go at your own risk.
They just say, go
at your own risk.
And was this for the BBC?
>>PEARCE: This for the BBC.
But that's how I prefer it.
I wouldn't want an armed
guard, because how am I
going to talk to people
if I got a guy with an AK?
It's not going to work.
So anyway, I was enjoying it,
but it was horribly tense.
And I was losing weight,
and I wasn't eating well.
And I kept catching
various diseases
because the water wasn't
purified or anything.
So I had about six or
seven intestinal diseases
by the time I got out.
Anyway, the Taliban took over.
And so there we are.
Because it became a
reasonably large story,
there was quite
a few journalists
at this first press conference.
The guy says, we have
two major announcements.
One, we declare
Afghanistan an Emirate.
And the second thing
we want to tell you
is that we sentenced the
BBC correspondent to death.
And I was sitting there in
my chair and waiting for--
>>REGINA: Were you the
only BBC correspondent?
>>PEARCE: I'm the only
BBC correspondent.
So I'm sitting in
this chair, and I'm
waiting for someone to come
and lift me out of the chair
and take me away.
And they don't.
So I go back to the
office, and I call London.
And I say, hey, guys, I've
just been sentenced to death.
Oh, Alan, you don't
need worry about that.
So I'm thinking, that
doesn't seem right.
Anyway, I carried on for about
three weeks, and part of the job
used to be crossing the front
lines from government forces
to Taliban.
Now it was Taliban
to government forces.
So we're trying to
cross the front lines,
and we come up against
a Taliban checkpoint.
And they are beyond jumpy.
They've obviously been
in action that day.
They're probably all stoned,
looking at their eyes.
And I said to the driver,
let's get out of here.
We'd take another route.
Instead of putting the
Land Rover into reverse,
he put it into first gear and
drove straight into two Taliban
and knocked them over.
>>REGINA: Uh, oh.
>>PEARCE: They got up.
Kindly, they didn't start
spraying us with their AKs.
They just beat in
the windscreen.
And my door gets yanked open.
I'm pulled out.
And this one-legged Mullah
comes along, and he's shouting.
Turns out he's
shouting, it's the BBC.
Kill them all.
And so they try and hang me,
but there weren't any trees.
So they throttled me.
[CHUCKLES] I was pinned up
against the side of the Landy,
and they throttled me
to unconsciousness.
They probably
thought I was dead.
>>REGINA: They did what to you?
>>PEARCE: Throttled me--
>>REGINA: Throttled you.
>>PEARCE: --to unconsciousness.
But it's not like in a movie.
I'm not going like this.
It's just like-- I don't
know, like a Vulcan death grip
in Star Trek or something.
One minute I'm there.
The next it just goes black.
And then I woke up, came to
in the back of the Land Rover.
And we're driving away.
A commander had shown up, who
was a professional soldier.
He said, what are you doing?
Get this guy out of here.
And that was that.
I didn't know they'd
broken my neck.
I didn't know for three months.
This often happens to
professional football players,
rugby players, and so on.
I woke up three months later
not working for the BBC
anymore, because my
contract had expired.
And I couldn't move my arms,
and I was in diabolical pain.
So I spent about the
next couple of years--
semi-paralyzed is
an exaggeration,
but it was a bit like that.
This led me to getting involved
in the training of journalists
to operate in war zones,
the things you need to know
and you need to know a lot,
and an awful lot of journalists
will turn up not knowing, not
even knowing basic first aid,
for example.
Suppose you're with a colleague,
and they get shot in the chest.
What do you do about it?
They don't know.
Fortunately, the BBC
very kindly sent me
on a proper training course.
I'm a qualified battlefield
medic as a consequence of this,
and there's so much to know.
But mostly,
journalists don't know.
So a friend of mine set
up a training course
to train journalists,
and we got two SAS guys,
Special Air Service--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: --and the SAS doctor.
And he teaches battlefield
medical things,
but way beyond what the regular
infantry do, way beyond that.
And these guys taught us so
much in basically a weekend.
And--
>>REGINA: Things you don't
learn in basic medic training.
>>PEARCE: Not what
you would normally
learn, like stuff that would
make most people cringe.
I'm not doing that, but you
will do it to save a life.
After time-- because
I'm then getting
involved in this
training course,
and I'm giving talks
about this or that
and firearms and whatever.
And my wife, private
investigator, we
were having dinner with
one of her clients.
He's a former special
branch officer,
which is like the top end.
He was a former undercover
agent, and so forth.
And over dinner, he's telling
us about all the things
that they can't see
on the internet.
I'm thinking, oh,
yeah, like what?
I'm plugging him very gently,
and he twigs eventually.
But I'm sucking too much
information out of him,
and he just clams up.
But he told me enough that
I could go away and reverse
engineer it.
And I found out how journalists
can operate on the internet,
under the radar, how you can
communicate without people
intercepting your
communications, how
you can protect your
sources, for example.
Supposing you're in a
war zone, and you got
photographs of a mass grave.
How are you going to get
them out of the country?
Well, you can hide them
in all sorts of ways.
There's a wonderful thing
called steganography.
So let's say I've got a
whole bunch of photographs
of a mass grave.
I can put them inside,
say, a Britney Spears album
on my iPhone.
Hide it inside a particular
track or all the tracks,
one photograph inside the track.
Unless you've got prior
knowledge, you would never know.
You get out the other end.
You run the album through
a steganography program,
and out pop your photographs.
>>REGINA: Oh, my God.
>>PEARCE: So I was teaching
journalists how to do all this.
>>REGINA: Now, did you back
engineer it and figure it
out yourself, or did they give
you some hints of how to do it?
>>PEARCE: He only gave me enough
to know that it can be done.
>>REGINA: And that
they're doing it.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
That took me a long time,
to find these things out.
And I found them for
a variety of ways.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: Then I found,
there was a thing
called the Occupy Movement.
I don't know if
anyone remembers that.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>PEARCE: And I was
training their people how
to communicate under the radar.
And I thought, I can
write a book about this.
So I just started
writing a book,
and I wrote one book that had
everything in it, all of it.
And it occurred to
me that no one really
is ever going to buy a
cybersecurity handbook
and read it.
People just don't do that.
So I thought I would
write a Sherlock Holmes
story, the world's
best detective,
told through the words of
his sidekick, Dr. Watson.
And it's a full-on
Sherlock Holmes story.
But when you get
to the end of it,
you realize you've absorbed
so much knowledge almost
by osmosis.
You don't know.
And you've just
had a fun journey.
>>REGINA: Oh, how fascinating.
>>PEARCE: And show how to
hide things inside things
and how to communicate.
Like, for example,
the FBI or whoever
will be monitoring people's
emails or their WhatsApp
if they can, even
though it's encrypted.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: Crooks and terrorists
don't operate that way.
They would operate inside
things like World of Warcraft,
where you can, within the
game, you've got chat facility.
Now, if you're talking
about bombs and guns
within World of
Warcraft, that's not
going to ring the alarm bells.
So they will
communicate that way.
They might even communicate in
something like My Little Pony
World and talk in code.
And don't say "bomb."
Say "birthday cake," and so on.
So I was showing people
how you can do this.
[CHUCKLING]
So I'm taking all the
dark arts, as it were,
and I'm employing them for
the power of good, showing
journalists, and eventually
human rights lawyers,
how they can communicate
with their clients
and gather and retain--
>>REGINA: Without being--
>>PEARCE: Without having--
>>REGINA: --surveilled.
>>PEARCE: --someone
looking over your shoulder.
Because it's a complete
joke that we are all
being monitored all the time
by all-- because they do it
because they can.
And why wouldn't you if you can?
Yeah, but they're not really
going to gain anything by--
>>REGINA: What a massive waste.
>>PEARCE: I mean,
reading my mom's emails.
I mean, what are they
going to get from that?
Nothing.
And the terrorists--
>>REGINA: Bakewell
tart recipe, maybe.
[LAUGHS]
>>PEARCE: Yeah, exactly.
But the terrorists and the drug
dealers and the arms dealers
and all the rest of it, they're
using the dark web, which
is a part of the internet.
The internet-- I mean, if
you think of the internet,
think of an iceberg.
And the surface web, like
an iceberg, is what we use,
if you're using
Google or whatever.
They're really only indexing the
things people are interested in.
There's so much on the internet
that no one's interested in.
There's databases.
There's all sorts of things.
They don't search inside there.
So the internet is
like an iceberg.
You see what's above, but
there's a massive amount
underneath.
And within the massive amount
underneath are the dark webs.
I can't say how many there are,
because the whole nature is
that they're secret.
But there's one
we do know about,
which is the Tor network, which
is actually set up by the US
Navy way back as a means
for them to communicate
surreptitiously
amongst themselves.
That somehow got out into the
wild, into the real world,
and other people
started using it.
It's just like the
regular internet,
but it's a bit like
the old dial-up,
that it's all kind
of slow and clunky,
because what you're
doing, you're
not just you connecting at
home on your laptop direct
to a website.
You're going entirely
around the globe,
bouncing off different devices
all the way around the world,
so it's impossible to trace
you back to your source.
So it's all a bit
clunky and slow.
Once you're in there, if
I wanted to buy an AK-47,
for example, I
can do it so easy.
And the thing is,
people aren't going
to cheat you so much because
you use a system of escrow
where I want to buy an AK-47.
Let's say it's $500.
I put $500 into
escrow from a website.
That's the marketplace.
The dealer sends me the
AK, which, incidentally,
they break down
into parts and put
inside things like fax machines
and other bits of kit like that.
And then it arrives,
and you assemble it.
You look on YouTube, see how
to put together an AK-47.
And then you release the
money from escrow and so on.
Drug dealers work in
exactly the same way,
but the tools that they're
using are the tools
that I know that journalists
and human rights lawyers
could really be using.
And to be a journalist,
if I say my mom's emails
are being read, you
can bet your life,
if you're a proper journalist,
that they are watching you
everywhere.
Now, I don't just mean that--
>>REGINA: No, this is true.
>>PEARCE: But everywhere.
I't's every--
>>REGINA: Every agency.
>>PEARCE: It goes like this.
You'd be stupid if you
didn't, so they do.
They will gather everything.
It's not like one person
is reading your emails.
It's a computer, and they're
looking for key words,
like "bomb" and so forth,
and "kill" and "president"
and things like that.
And if they all pop up
in the same message,
they'll come and
get you in some way.
>>REGINA: You do
a funny little bit
about-- write this in
an email to someone,
sprinkle those words
through, and see
how quickly you get a reaction.
>>PEARCE: --if you
don't believe me.
Yeah, yeah.
Next time, you
write to your mom.
>>REGINA: So--
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: So I have a
couple of questions.
One of them is, you
were teaching this
openly or covertly?
>>PEARCE: Oh, no,
openly, openly.
>>REGINA: OK, so did any
kind of governmental agencies
bother you at all?
>>PEARCE: They don't
know what I'm teaching.
They're probably not
sending anyone on a course.
I mean, a bunch of journos
learning first aid,
learning about firearms.
>>REGINA: So they
have no idea, OK.
And then what I wonder--
OK, before we drill
down into this
a little further, when the NSA--
and certainly, Edward Snowden
made this known to all of us--
is gathering information on--
documentaries have been made--
all of its citizens, like this--
you think, why would
they be so stupid?
Why would they waste
so much energy?
Except, if they're looking
for societal memes,
for continued manipulation
of our emotions and--
yeah.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, there's more
to it than they would claim.
>>REGINA: Please, please
talk about that a little bit
so we understand.
They're not just wasting money.
They're doing their
own stuff with it.
Tell us what they're
doing in your opinion.
>>PEARCE: I think
most governments
would like to know what
their populace is thinking.
Yeah?
It goes like that.
And you can very
easily do these things.
>>REGINA: You can get
societal sentiment
in a glimpse with
the algorithms.
>>PEARCE: Exactly.
And the way tech is moving
forward all the time,
and data storage is so easy.
So let's say you make a phone
call on your cell phone.
No one's listening, but
it's being recorded.
And it's being stored
somewhere in some database.
If, at some point in the future,
you come to their attention,
they can go back into
your phone records
and listen to all your
phone calls, for example.
And that's happening
to all of us.
No one knows--
People don't know
this, generally.
That's just one example.
If you can think of any
means that a government might
use to spy on its
citizens, they're
using every one of those means.
They really are.
And they're also incredibly lax.
It's not as if we're all
up to no good or anything,
but I don't like somebody
looking over my shoulder
if I'm reading an article.
It's just an
uncomfortable feeling.
And also, too, the more
information you put online--
everyone's giving away
so much information.
You go to someone's
Facebook page--
my wife's a private
investigator.
First thing she does when
is tracking someone down,
she goes to Facebook.
She finds all the
social media things.
She finds out the
mother's maiden name,
the person's mother's maiden
name, his date of birth.
With that, you can
start opening databases.
You can start doing
all manner of things.
Don't post things
like that online.
Don't say, I'm going on
vacation or post pictures
from the Bahamas, because
someone is interested in you
will know your home is empty.
And they can come round
and burgle your home.
>>REGINA: And this is
just baseline stuff.
>>PEARCE: Oh, this
is just so easy.
I'd like to say the
streets are safer today
because so many criminals
have moved online.
>>REGINA: Well, that's what
I was going to ask you.
So I mean, there have to be
some estimates of how much crime
is left on the streets when you
can just do it in a cyber world.
>>PEARCE: I mean, there's
still crime on the streets.
You could be sitting in
an outdoor cafe looking
on your brand-new
iPhone, and someone's
going to whip it out of
your hand in no time.
>>REGINA: You have a drive by.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, all of that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: There's so
many ways of getting you.
There's so many ways, yeah.
People's heartstrings,
for example-- one
of the worst things
they do, posing, say,
as a member of the US
military and saying, I'm
looking for love and
friendship and stuff.
And then they will
form a relationship
with somebody online.
And then, we're going to meet.
We're going to meet Thursday.
I'm going to fly down
to Florida and meet you.
And for some reason, I
can't-- you get to that date,
and I couldn't make it.
I couldn't get on the
plane or whatever.
My mother's sick, and I've
got to pay for an operation.
I haven't got the money.
And next thing people
are handing over money.
This is normal.
This is happening every day.
>>REGINA: And you always
have your Nigerian princes.
>>PEARCE: All of those.
I mean, how many times have
we all had ridiculous emails?
I am so and so, the daughter of
the Nigerian finance minister.
I have $57 million.
Can we place it in your
account for safekeeping?
Why are they picking
me out of the ether?
People fall for it, or they
wouldn't keep doing it.
Yeah, there are
rooms full of people
doing this on a daily basis,
pulling at heartstrings.
And that's the worst
one, the heartstrings,
because you're not
only breaking a heart.
You're emptying
somebody's bank account.
I mean, it's just horrendous.
And that's just one example.
>>REGINA: Well, we're
going to get down
to what you can get for $400.
That's what really drew
me into your conversation.
Before we get
there, OK, so we're
giving away all of this
personal information
through Facebook and to
Instagram and everywhere else.
What happens when
we're a consumer who's
just going on and constantly
being bombarded with come-ons?
And we sign up for sales
of all kinds everywhere.
Now, what happens to us, where
you're on all these websites?
>>PEARCE: Well, OK.
If you're not--
>>REGINA: Sign up here in
order to get our 50% off sale.
Women do this.
>>PEARCE: If you're not
paying, you're the product.
That's what they say.
[LAUGHTER]
Now, they will try every--
I mean, I don't even
know where to begin.
There's just so
much I could say.
>>REGINA: Just, this
is for the women
in the audience that tend to
really fall for a lot of this.
>>PEARCE: OK, well, I talked
to the heartbreak scams.
So there's those.
>>REGINA: The sale,
savings, money scams.
>>PEARCE: OK, I don't really
know what I could say--
>>REGINA: Yeah, other than
that they're just gathering--
you're putting your personal--
>>PEARCE: You're giving out
just too much information.
>>REGINA: Too many sources.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, and it's
private data storage companies
that will sell on
your information
to somebody, your voting
preferences, your education,
what you'd like to read.
I don't want people
to know this about me,
unless I choose to tell them.
I just don't want that
information shared.
It makes me feel
horribly uncomfortable.
And then they're going to
specifically target you
because there's an
election coming up,
and they may think you're
a swing voter or something.
And they'll push and
push and push and push,
and they know what buttons
to press because they
know what you like.
And they know what
you don't like.
>>REGINA: You can be
purchasing on retail sites that
have similar qualities that
would maybe be more, say,
clothing lines,
more associated with
anthroposophical, liberal
people versus the conservatives
and such.
And even from that, they
can start targeting you.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, do you--
>>REGINA: Everything
compiles a profile.
>>PEARCE: I'd like to
do everything secretly,
even though I've
got nothing to hide.
So anyone who's using the
internet, using a browser,
just take Chrome for an example,
on the right-hand corner,
there's a button
you can press that
makes that browser go private.
What that means is it's
not taking on any cookies.
You visit a website.
You're not taking any cookies.
When you close
down that browser,
everything that you've done
vanishes into the ether.
That's not on your computer.
Let's suppose you wanted to buy
your husband a birthday present,
and he wanted to research it.
And the next time the
husband picks up your phone
or looks over your shoulder,
and up comes this--
>>REGINA: Yeah, pop-ups.
>>PEARCE: You've been
researching cruises
to the Bahamas, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, game given away.
>>REGINA: So just
on that level--
>>PEARCE: So just that.
>>REGINA: You're
talking incognito.
>>PEARCE: So you can just
say you're incognito,
and you just do all
that research that way.
>>REGINA: And tell people how
easy it is to find incognito.
>>PEARCE: Just
private or incognito.
That's it.
Just do that.
>>REGINA: Under
your preferences.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: I do that a
lot, I mean, just a lot.
When I look at my-- oh, no,
let's say, reading a newspaper,
all the ads that pop up
on that newspaper online
have something to do with my
recent searching preferences.
Let's say I was
talking to a friend
about going to Venice for
a holiday, for a vacation.
Next thing I know, I'm
getting hotels in Venice.
I'm getting cheap
flights to Venice.
I'm getting all sorts of--
that just makes me feel
horribly uncomfortable.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah, OK--
>>PEARCE: But that's
the soft side of it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, let me give
you more of the soft side of it
that I think is creepy.
So I have a roomie who's an
old friend of mine, Stephanie.
When I searched something,
she gets the pop-ups on.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
Yeah, it makes you wonder.
Sometimes, I wonder,
and I can't prove this--
>>REGINA: Sometimes, we'll
just be talking about--
>>PEARCE: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: I'm saying, we're
just talking about something,
and she gets the
pop-ups for that.
>>PEARCE: OK, you got
an Alexa on your desk?
>>REGINA: I don't
even have Alexa,
but we have our cell
phones sitting there.
>>PEARCE: Well, if you've
got one of these devices--
and I won't say specifically
they're doing this, they're not,
because maybe they'll sue
me because I can't prove it.
All of that's being recorded.
Everything's being recorded.
I wouldn't be surprised
if you're watching TV,
and your conversations
are being recorded,
because they'd like to know
your viewing preferences
and that kind of thing.
>>REGINA: I think so,
because sometimes, I'll
notice I'll hear
this little ding.
And it's taking a
text of everything
I'm saying on my
phone, and I have not.
>>PEARCE: I honestly believe we
are being listened to in ways I
cannot prove.
How can I even prove it?
But they are.
I'm convinced it.
And your example
of your friend--
[CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: Getting things
I'm talking about.
>>PEARCE: Was that coincidence?
And in the intelligence world--
>>REGINA: No, it
happens all the time.
It's not a coincidence.
>>PEARCE: In the intelligence
world, there's no such thing.
>>REGINA: So that means they're
picking up whatever I'm saying,
and it's being distributed to
her and in close proximity.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, if
you're up to no good, OK,
that's another thing.
But if you're just choosing
a gift for a friend,
it's just horrible.
It's just not right.
So you take that further, and
I would train a journalist
or human rights lawyer--
they can communicate with their
client or a source for a story
and not have somebody
intercepting their emails.
A lot of people using WhatsApp,
it's end-to-end encryption.
>>REGINA: It says,
but you say it's not.
>>PEARCE: You want
to get around that.
You put a drive-by download
into your phone or your laptop
or whatever, and they just
read what's on the screen.
So it doesn't matter.
>>REGINA: Wait, so hold
on-- drive-by downloads.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Tell us--
>>PEARCE: So you
visit a website.
You get an email--
we're having a
fantastic sale, 50% off.
And you think, well, I bought
boots from them before.
That's not a problem.
But it's not them.
And you go and click on the
button, and you get there.
And maybe it's a blank
page, or maybe it's a--
it is a page that looks normal.
Just by visiting that page,
you are taking on board
a drive-by download.
This can take the form of a rat,
a remote-access Trojan for--
this is where it gets scary.
If somebody puts a
remote-access Trojan
into your phone or your
laptop or whatever,
they can screw
with you massively.
>>REGINA: Is that where this
other thing comes in you
talked about in your Ted Talk?
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK,
we'll go into that.
>>PEARCE: Like, for example,
I mean, things they can do--
next time you go to
PayPal and you type
in your PayPal
password, they see it.
They can empty that account.
Next time you go to
your bank account
and you put in
your details, they
can mimic that for themselves.
They can empty
your bank account.
Then there's other people that
do it just for sick kicks.
People have rat
slaves, for example.
What's a rat slave?
You get inside their--
let's say their
laptop, for example,
and you might want to
screw with their head.
And next time they
open their laptop,
all the icons have moved.
Why has that happened?
And why, in the
middle of the night,
can I hear a baby screaming
over and over and over again?
This is someone
playing with your head.
And--
>>REGINA: They're just
doing-- pranksters.
>>PEARCE: Just--
>>REGINA: Hackers
doing it for kicks.
>>PEARCE: Some spotty kid
somewhere maybe 1,000 miles
away, sucking on a
Coke and eating pizza.
And they're just
doing that for fun.
And then they posted these
things online, on the dark web.
And then you can see these rat
slaves pulling their hair out
because all their money's gone,
or because, like, there's--
they've gone to using
AI image generation,
and they've got you naked.
>>REGINA: Yeah, this
is a big one now.
>>PEARCE: And we're
going to send this
to your friends and
family because we've
got your contacts book.
And unless you send us X in
Bitcoin, and that's not easy--
but unless you send us X in
Bitcoin by this time Friday,
we're going to post
it to everyone.
How would that make people feel?
And it's not even you naked.
It's AI.
>>REGINA: But stuff Is
happening, and it's happening--
>>PEARCE: If you can think
of it, it's happening.
>>REGINA: Well, I was
listening to a report on--
I was on Spotify listening to
The Daily New York-- that's
the New York Times Podcast,
talking about how often this
is happening in high school,
where these boys are creating
AI-generated faces on the
girls they're taking pictures
of, I mean, bodies on them, and
sending the stuff around schools
and just ruining girls' lives.
>>PEARCE: This is happening
all over the world.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: I'm living in
France at the moment.
There's been a big court
case with some young kids
over the age of about 13
or 14, took the headshots
of all the girls in the class.
And they--
>>REGINA: Put new
bodies on them.
>>PEARCE: --run it through
an AI image generator
and then post it
amongst themselves.
And these girls are
just having breakdowns.
And they can't
tell their parents.
They can't tell anyone.
And the kids, what do they get?
They just get ticked off.
They don't get fined or
sent to prison or anything.
They just get ticked off.
>>REGINA: They might have
to miss a day of school.
The high school case,
the girls are trapped.
They're devastated.
And the boys get a
suspension of a day.
>>PEARCE: Yeah,
something like that.
>>REGINA: Something like that.
>>PEARCE: But meanwhile,
your life is ruined.
And you won't go online
again or do anything again
like that, because you're
now scared stiff to go out
in the world on a digital site.
>>REGINA: Right.
So let's continue
with the rat thing,
because there are other things
that they've been able to do,
which can take your
life into even more
serious consequences for
just a small amount of money.
First of all, where are a lot
of these rat farms located?
Do we know?
Are they everywhere?
>>PEARCE: No.
it's very hard to say.
There are odd facilities
in places like Syria,
for example, that are
protected by private militia.
Now, no one can get
into those facilities.
They can't hack into them.
They can't send
us, I don't know,
SEAL Team Six or
something there.
>>REGINA: These are rat farms?
>>PEARCE: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PEARCE: But they're
doing everything there.
>>REGINA: Everything, yeah.
>>PEARCE: Everything
you can think of.
They're data mining.
They're doing all
sorts, and they're
operating inside dodgy countries
where, really, the rule of law
is just not applied.
So you're up against so much.
So what I'd like to advocate
is don't do the things
that draw their attention.
And if you get their
attention, these
are some of the things you might
be able to do to get out of it.
But once they've got hold
of you, it's not easy.
>>REGINA: Well, one of the
things you talked about, too
is, for example, one of
the really malicious things
is, once a rat has gotten
into your computer,
to be able to place on your
desktop child pornography,
for example.
>>PEARCE: This is the
most horrifying thing.
Can you think of anything worse?
So I've had this happen to
me, not actually put in.
But when I was
working as a journo,
and I was quizzing someone,
he said to me, right now
I'm putting kiddie
porn in your computer.
He wasn't, but you know--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: So this--
>>REGINA: And they do.
They can--
>>PEARCE: Oh, they do.
I know they do.
I mean, the Israeli Mossad
will do this to journalists,
for example.
>>REGINA: If they question
the narrative or whatever.
>>PEARCE: Journalists question
Israel's motives in cases,
for example, are
opening themselves
to a wealth of problems.
They will destroy your
life if they choose to,
and a good way is images
of child sexual abuse.
>>REGINA: And then they
report it to authorities,
and authorities look
at your computer.
And then you're in jail.
>>PEARCE: And
what's your defense?
Oh, I wrote an article
about Gaza or something.
Yeah, pull the other one.
>>REGINA: Whoa.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So as--
>>PEARCE: But you can
pay someone to do that.
Let's supposing someone
really screws with me,
someone I really hate.
I would then pay $500, $600
to someone on the dark web
and have them load images
of child sexual abuse
onto their computer and
then tip off the police,
and their lives are ruined.
You'll never recover from that--
never, ever recover from that.
>>REGINA: How can
you explain it?
Well, it wasn't there.
It wasn't there before.
It wasn't there yesterday.
You can't explain it.
>>PEARCE: And if
you were doing it,
you'd say exactly the
same thing anyway.
So you're never
going to be believed.
And this is so easy, and
there's different levels
set for $5, $10,
$20 or something,
you can do strange things, like
completely screw all their--
in fact, let's say that someone
would get into your Facebook
page, completely modify
your Facebook page,
and then change the password
so you can't get back in there.
So for example, they might post
terrible things about your boss
as if it was you saying
things about your boss
to get you to lose your job.
[SCOFFS] Few hundred
dollars for that, nothing.
And you can't now then go back
on Facebook and change it.
And you want to contact
the Facebook people
and say, hey, this has happened.
You're never going to hear back.
You'll never hear back.
>>REGINA: No.
>>PEARCE: This is how
you can screw with people
in the modern world.
>>REGINA: It's just, the whole
thing sounds like a rat's nest,
really.
>>PEARCE: It makes me feel
physically sick, I mean,
really physically sick.
And when you go
onto the dark web--
and you need a special
browser, and you
should be using a virtual
private network and all the rest
of it-- once you're
on there, you're
into a very, very strange world.
>>REGINA: But your
whole thing now
is to explain to people how they
can co-opt that strange world
to protect themselves.
>>PEARCE: Well, I've taken
the best of the dark arts,
as it were.
And I've turned them
to the power of good.
So as I was saying
at the beginning,
a journalist could
use steganography
to hide photographs, but just
to communicate with somebody.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
How would you do that?
How would we have secure email--
>>PEARCE: Well, there's no--
>>REGINA: --outside of WhatsApp?
>>PEARCE: I wouldn't
even use secure email.
>>REGINA: I mean,
I'm saying email.
How can we communicate
outside of WhatsApp?
>>PEARCE: Let's supposing
you lived in a small village,
and some corporation wanted
to frack in your area.
And you wanted to
create a little group
to combat the fracking
because you didn't like it.
The people working for
that fracking company
would be well aware of
everything you're doing
and will do everything they
can to thwart your efforts.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: I can
show you very easily
how to set up methods
of communication
where no one can
intercept it in transit.
Here's easy.
Open an email account at Google.
Share the login
details privately
by word of mouth with people.
Using the anonymous browser
on your phone or whatever--
>>REGINA: Like incognito.
>>PEARCE: You go to the
Google web mail page,
and the message is
awaiting you in the drafts.
It's not being posted.
It cannot be intercepted,
because it's not gone anywhere.
It's just sitting there
in a tiny little corner
of the internet.
And everybody just reads the
draft or posts in drafts.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So these
are the things
you were writing about in
your Sherlock Holmes guide.
>>PEARCE: And that's not
even complicated, is it?
Anyone can do that.
So the corporation is going
to monitor your emails
because they can, and
they're going to miss that.
They're going to
miss that entirely.
Yeah?
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PEARCE: And what I tend to
teach is a form of spycraft.
It's not so much digital, but
you're using the digital tools.
It's a game of cat and mouse.
It's outfoxing somebody or
being one step ahead of.
And whatever you're doing
and it's working, change it.
Do something else.
Change it.
Don't let them get a grip
on what you're doing.
Stay one step ahead of them.
>>REGINA: So what
happens when you
have a whole string of passwords
for bank accounts, everything
else, but they're all the same?
>>PEARCE: OK, I keep a
basic, simple password,
just a really simple one.
And then I tack on
to the end of it.
Let's supposing it was--
and in my bank account.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: Right.
So I might have Bonfire
of the Vanities, which
is about bankers.
So I might take the first line
from Bonfire of the Vanities
and take the initial letter.
And then I just remember
what those letters are,
and I tack that onto
my regular password.
No one's going to
guess what that is.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PEARCE: Sometimes, if
I didn't want people to--
because they will run
a computer through
every possible
permutation of what
your password might be until
they eventually might crack it.
I use symbols, like smiley faces
and stuff instead of words.
They're not necessarily
looking for that.
Use odd symbols
that they're never
going to use as a
matter of course,
like the British pound symbol or
the euro and things like that.
>>REGINA: Good idea.
>>PEARCE: As a matter of
course, they won't automatically
go for that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: And that will
keep people out of it.
But never, ever, ever use the
same password for everything.
I'd like to teach people to--
here's a way to share a
password with someone.
So you say Jane Austen's
Pride and Prejudice.
Well, the first line of--
I've actually
never forgotten it.
But all you need to do is
open Pride and Prejudice
on Amazon Books--
>>REGINA: Look at
the first line.
>>PEARCE: --look
at the first line.
Take the initial letter
from every one of those.
That's your password.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PEARCE: So you just
have to say "pride."
>>REGINA: Basic spy craft.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So with the
government's agencies,
like our NSA or CIA
or MI6 or whatever,
are they all able to dive to
the bottom of the deep web?
Do they have access?
>>PEARCE: They kind
of invented it,
to say the US Navy began this.
Yeah, they're using it
all the time anyway.
>>REGINA: So they can keep
their eye on what's going on?
>>PEARCE: Well, they're
using it anyway.
Embassies are using
it to communicate back
to the home country,
and so on and so forth,
and not have things intercepted.
Because the internet is
so huge, and the dark web
and all the rest of it, forget
hiding a needle in a haystack.
You're hiding a needle in
a universe of haystacks.
And without prior knowledge,
you will never find it,
without prior knowledge.
So if you've got a group and
you're opposed to fracking,
you minimize any
communication online,
except perhaps using this
box, the draft Google Mail.
And then change it
to Yahoo, and then
change it to something else.
And keep staying one
step ahead of people.
And if you were seriously
into doing something
and you didn't want
people to monitor you,
get a really crappy
kind of old phone.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>PEARCE: Right?
And--
>>REGINA: Or burners.
>>PEARCE: And put
talking code in text.
They can't monitor
those so readily.
>>REGINA: Right.
Most people will say, well,
I have nothing to hide.
What difference does it make?
>>PEARCE: Yeah, right.
Well, this is a bit like
quoting the Nazis because Joseph
Goebbels coined the phrase
"if you have nothing to hide,
you have nothing to fear"
when he founded the Gestapo.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>PEARCE: Now, so
I don't like it
when people quote the Nazis
in terms of personal security.
>>REGINA: But that's
most people say.
>>PEARCE: That's
what most people say.
But then you look at
corporations or crooks
and stuff.
It's not about having to
hide things because you're
up to no good yourself.
If you were a journalist,
and you're trying to find,
I don't know, a
corporation that's
poisoning rivers or something,
that's a good thing.
And you're using these dark
arts for that power of good,
then use them.
Use them.
And I will show you every
way I have discovered,
and I've discovered
them from a--
>>REGINA: In a
Sherlock Holmes story.
>>PEARCE: Well, yeah, that's why
I put them in a Sherlock Holmes
story, because no one's
going to sit and read
a cybersecurity handbook.
>>REGINA: I love it.
OK, so I have a
question for you.
We have these events that
take place all the time.
Of course, depending
on the community
that you are logged
in with, some people
can say false flags, attacks,
Manchurian candidates,
and all of the like.
So we have people who commit
these larger crimes and attempt
not that long ago on Donald
Trump's life and many others.
Now, people get confused
because people now don't trust
anybody or anything they say.
Now that was a setup.
But the question is whether it
was a setup or wasn't a setup.
Are the people that do
these kinds of crimes,
then they write
about their history,
a 20-year-old who belongs to
a gun club, versus terrorists,
deep, deep terrorists
and, say, the Mossad,
which has agents embedded in
every terrorist organization,
including Hamas, to the hilt--
>>PEARCE: Because they'd be
foolish that they didn't.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so yeah,
they've got agents everywhere.
They know what's going on.
>>PEARCE: They don't need to
monitor us as a consequence.
They do--
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm asking you.
>>PEARCE: No, they do not.
They're doing it
for other reasons.
They want to know all sorts.
They just want to
know what you're
thinking on a basic level.
Because next time they're
having an election, they can--
their prospectus
for their election,
they can target it to suit what
people are thinking because they
know their deeper thoughts.
Well I'm sorry--
>>REGINA: And their fears.
>>PEARCE: --over my shoulder.
I don't like it.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
They know their
fears, and that's
how you're going to manipulate
the masses, because they then
control the media
in all countries,
not just this
country, all medias.
The intelligence
controls the media.
And if anybody doesn't think
so, they need to study--
>>PEARCE: As a journalist
in the field, when
you bump into another
journalist, mostly for me
because I'm skeptical,
first thought
is, is that a journalist?
Or are they working
for an agency?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: A very good friend
of mine, a photographer that I
worked with for
years, turned out
to be feeding
information to the Brits,
not as a spy or anything,
but as a sideline,
found out because we got caught
doing something together.
We caught the Thai soldiers
about to massacre some refugees.
His sources told us
to leave the country
because we were being charged,
and that's how we found--
I found out--
>>REGINA: That he was
a plant, more or less.
>>PEARCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So if you have the
lone shooter story, in general,
we're reading our headlines, oh,
19-year-old, 22-year-old male,
mentally disturbed.
Just your general
thought on this.
Are they generally
lone agent people
that do this that you couldn't
have monitored them per se?
They're not really that deep.
Or are they something more?
>>PEARCE: Oftentimes, though,
you will go back and you will
see they've posted all
sorts of crazy stuff--
all sorts of crazy stuff.
But what do you do?
You then, you're into precrime.
It's like a Philip K.
Dick novel of something.
>>REGINA: Minority Report, yeah?
>>PEARCE: Yeah, exactly.
So what, you arrest
people for precrime?
Yeah.
And maybe they were doing it
just because they were angry
one day.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>PEARCE: That's it.
But they had no intention
of killing anyone.
>>REGINA: But the ones
who do the real terrorism,
the one who manipulate
governments--
>>PEARCE: You won't find them.
>>REGINA: You're not
going to ever find them.
They are at the base
of the deep web.
>>PEARCE: And many
times they're not even
using that technology at all.
They've gone back to original
spy craft of handwritten notes
and suchlike, and codes, codes
based on a book, book code,
and so on and so forth.
They use those techniques.
>>REGINA: Have you encountered
this sort of thing in your life?
>>PEARCE: No, because they--
[CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: They would never
be encountered by someone
like you or anyone.
>>PEARCE: If you're
really doing that,
you're using some spycraft that
people were using the 1800s.
Yeah?
>>REGINA: And they've
gone back to that.
>>PEARCE: Yeah, and they're
not going to find you,
because where they're looking?
They're looking online.
They're looking in your
mom's email account.
>>REGINA: So the ones that are
really screwing up this planet,
really causing deep
societal disturbances,
creating wars, et cetera, those
are the ones that are never
going to be gotten to anyway.
And they're doing it often in
relationship to the governments
and the intelligence agencies.
>>PEARCE: Because many times,
there's somebody even stronger
behind them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: Take the
Russians and the Chinese.
They're hacking left,
right, and center.
In Britain, where I
come from, now hospitals
are having these
ransomware attacks
where they lock the computers.
And you can't carry
out operations.
You can't book appointments.
You can't do anything unless
you pay millions of dollars
in Bitcoin to some
entity that's hiding
in Russia or China or
North Korea or wherever,
and you're not going
to combat that.
>>REGINA: This is only
going to get worse, though.
>>PEARCE: You can
combat it by actually
putting some smart tech in your
computer in the first place.
And you can train people not
to follow links willy-nilly.
You get an email.
You get an email purporting to
be from PayPal, for example.
And it says, there's a
problem with your account.
You need to reset your password.
Click this button.
Reset your password.
[CHUCKLES] Well, don't.
Look at the email address
that it's come from.
>>REGINA: Always look
at the email address.
>>PEARCE: Because it
may say, PayPal 7238.
>>REGINA: Dot IA or
dot whatever, yeah.
>>PEARCE: There's nothing
like that in PayPal.
So don't follow it.
And then go and put your
cursor over any links.
And hopefully, the link
address will come up.
And it doesn't say paypal.com.
>>REGINA: Anywhere.
>>PEARCE: Don't go there.
>>REGINA: So maybe a career for
up and coming computer techies
is really, cybersecurity sounds
like that's where it's at across
the board, every level of
cybersecurity, from grandma to--
>>PEARCE: I wouldn't want to be
in that level of cybersecurity,
because it's such a
game of cat and mouse.
It's constantly changing.
Someone is already one step
ahead of you the whole time,
and you're playing catch-up.
And then you're going to get--
>>REGINA: Sounded like an idea.
What about DuckDuckGo?
>>PEARCE: DotDotGo?
>>REGINA: DuckDuckGo.
>>PEARCE: Oh, DuckDuckGo.
I like DuckDuckGo.
>>REGINA: Because
that's what I use.
>>PEARCE: I like it mostly
because I like the name.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's cute.
>>PEARCE: But it's a browser,
for those that don't know,
that when you close that
browser down, boom, everything--
>>REGINA: Like incognito.
>>PEARCE: Just like incognito,
but slightly more sophisticated.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>PEARCE: And the search
facility is particularly good.
Supposing you're
a budding author,
and you want to write a
novel about a terrorist.
And you want to know
how to build a bomb.
>>REGINA: And you don't
want to be arrested.
[CHUCKLES]
>>PEARCE: No.
If you start researching "how
do I build a bomb" on Google,
someone will find out about it.
You might never know,
but you might never
be able to get on a plane again.
Or maybe you can't
access your bank account.
So this happens a lot.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
OK, so that's good.
So we've got incognito.
We've got DuckDuckGo.
Those are a couple of easy
ones anybody can access.
And then as far as any
of the deeper, darker web
stuff, we probably,
as individuals,
don't need to go as deeply
as you went into it.
>>PEARCE: What I would
recommend, though, is people
get a Virtual Private
Network, a VPN.
>>REGINA: OK, a VPN.
>>PEARCE: They're
largely inexpensive.
And people then don't know where
you are, for example, which is--
>>REGINA: They can't tell
where you are location-wise.
>>PEARCE: No.
>>REGINA: That's a good idea.
>>PEARCE: So just
supposing I was
researching how to build a
bomb for a novel I was writing.
I would have a VPN.
I'd set it up somewhere
as if I was in Ukraine.
I would use maybe DuckDuckGo.
Or if I really
wanted to go deeper,
I would use the Tor browser,
T-O-R, stands for The Onion
Router, freely downloadable.
That puts you in the dark web.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>PEARCE: Right, and then what
with the VPN, what with that,
and you're bouncing off other
people all around the planet,
they never trace you back,
unless you're foolish
and you stay on there too long.
Or maybe your VPN
dies because there's
an interruption on the
power supply or something.
Keep moving.
>>REGINA: So all
this is in your book.
>>PEARCE: All of
this is in the book,
in the Sherlock Holmes
one because that's
what they're up against.
And there's other terrible
things that will happen.
I talked to Rathik.
I mean, do you want me to
tell you more horrible things?
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Let's to do that
in a second conversation
because we're out of
time, I'm sorry to say.
>>PEARCE: Well, we
could talk forever.
>>REGINA: We could
talk forever, and I
am so grateful for what
you've already told us.
So we will pick this
conversation up again later.
Alan, thank you so much.
Scary but necessary talk.
>>PEARCE: Regina, thank
you for having me.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of the book
is The Sherlock Holmes
Handbook for the Digital Age.
Let's thank Alan for taking
the blinders off our eyes.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[THEME MUSIC]